
MyHDL Project Introduction
===========================
[MyHDL]() is a Python package that extends Python as a 
hardware description language (HDL).

Getting with MyHDL resources

   * [Why MyHDL]()
   * [What MyHDL is Not]()
   * [MyHDL Manual]()

The MyHDL project has outlined a [development process]() 
that should be followed by each participant.  This includes
writing [enhancement proposals]() for projects that contribute
directly to the MyHDL package.

All projects require programming in Python.

MyHDL Community
===============
The [MyHDL mailing-list]() and [IRC Channel #myhdl]() can be
used to interact with the community.  Most questions can be 
answered in one of these two outlets.  There is also a [MyHDL
tag]() on stackoverflow that can be used.

   * [IRC Channel #myhdl]()
   * [MyHDL mailing-list]()


Project Ideas
=============
The project ideas fall into two categories: 1) enhancments to
the MyHDL package, 2) creating "cores" with MyHDL.


MyHDL Package
-------------

### Refactor Conversion Code
This project will involve refactoring the conversion code so more
of the code can be shared ...

<skills and difficulty>
<potential mentors>

### General Heirarchy Analyzer
This development is intended to ... This would also support 
[MEP110]().

<skills and difficulty>
<potential mentors>


### Developer Documentation
This project involves documenting the MyHDL compiler (conversion
code).  The conversion code uses the Python compiler packages.
Both the Python compiler package and the MyHDL conversion code
are poorly documented.  This project would involved generating 
documentation to introduce a potential developer to the Python
compiler tools and the MyHDL conversion code.

This project is perfect for a student interested in compilers
and getting some pratcial experience with the Python compiler
tools.  This project requires basic experience with compilers.

<skills and difficulty>
<potential mentors>


MyHDL Cores
-----------
First we need to define what a **core** is.  A **core** or also
known as intellectual property (IP) are common building blocks
for a complex digital system.  These reusable cores are 
The following projects are the development and/or ports of common
building blocks used in many complex digital systems.  These are
not intented to be straight ports.  They are intended to be designed
in the MyHDL philosophy bringing many software concepts to hardware
design.  


### Gigabit Ethernet MAC

<description>

<skills and difficulty>
This project requires digital circuit familiarity, ability 
to read and understand Verilog, and Python 

The potential mentors for this project are:
   0. [Christopher Felton](), *cfelton* on IRC channel and
      [FeltonChris]() on twitter.


### HDMI Source / Sink
<description>

<skills and difficulty>
This project requires digital circuit familiarity, ability 
to read and understand Verilog, and Python 

The potential mentors for this project are:
   0. [Christopher Felton](), *cfelton* on IRC channel and
      [FeltonChris]() on twitter.


### SDRAM Controller
<description>

<skills and difficulty>
This project requires digital circuit familiarity, ability 
to read and understand Verilog, and Python 

The potential mentors for this project are:
   0. [Christopher Felton](), *cfelton* on IRC channel and
      [FeltonChris]() on twitter.
