---
mep:     106
title:   Modular bit vector types 
layout:  mep
author:  Jan Decaluwe
status:  Final 
date:    2011-05-25
version: 
---

Rationale
=========

Recently, there has been a lot of activity regarding "wrap-around" types. I
have looked at the proposals. My own thoughts on the matter have evolved also.
Here is my analysis and proposal.

First some background.  One of my main critiques on the mainstream use of
Verilog/VHDL is the focus on "representational" types for integer arithmetic.
In other words, the starting point is a bit vector representation to which an
integer interpretation is added later. The hidden assumption is that this is
necessary for implementation efficiency.

I believe that MyHDL has convincingly demonstrated that there is a better way
by taking a top-down perspective. In MyHDL, integer arithmetic simply works as
expected. The convertor takes care of representational details as required by
the Verilog/VHDL target.

This is not just a semantic discussion. In MyHDL, you don't need castings,
manual sign extensions or resizings to get integer arithmetic to work. In
Verilog/VHDL, that is the name of the game. Best of all, there is no
implementation efficiency price to pay.

Understandably, I would like to use a similar approach when considering to
introduce new types: first look at the modelling aspect, that is, how a
designer would prefer to use a type, and only then move to conversion and
efficiency concerns.

Wrap-around type proposals
==========================

There is no question that there is a genuine need for the elegant modeling of
wrap-around behavior in hardware modeling. The question is whether this is
important enough to warrant dedicated language support.

In the past, I have suggested that this need may not be that high. For example,
in the common case of an incrementer or decrementor, it is often necessary to
decode the end count anyway:

```python
if count == N-1:
    count.next = 0
    some_decode_action()
else:
    count.next = count + 1
```
    
However, I would agree that even then it could be clearer to keep the
incrementer description separate from the decoding:

```python
if count == N-1:
    some_decode action()
    
count.next = (count + 1) % N
```

I have also argued that the modulo operator offers an explicit and elegant
high-level solution to describe wrap-around behavior in a one-liner. However,
it has been pointed out that this doesn't work for the case of a "signed"
integer.  A `wrap()` method was proposed as a solution.

Both the modulo operator and a `wrap()` method have some disadvantages. Though
they are explicit in good Python style, there is a conflict with another good
principle: DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself). If wrap-around is the desired behavior,
it is probably a property of an object and its type, not of a particular
assignment.

The two techniques have another problem that I have successfully managed to
keep out of spotlights in earlier discussions :-). I believe a common use case
for wrap-around behavior would be to describe an incrementor/decrementer using
augmented asssignment with a variable:

```python
count += 1
```

The two techniques discussed above cannot support this.

Another proposal is  a `wrap` parameter to the intbv constructor, with default
False. When True, it would modify the assignment behavior as desired.

This technique addresses the issues mentioned above, but has some problems
itself.  An additional parameter makes object construction heavier. Also, the
use of a default value suggests that one type of behavior is the rule, and the
other the exception.  I don't like the idea of modifying the fundamental
behavior of a type in such a way.  If wrap-around behavior is considered
important enough to warrant direct language support, it should be as easy to
use as other behaviors.

Finally, a parameter cannot support the following conversion
trick:

```python
a = intbv(0)[N:]
```

to construct an "N bits wide" positive intbv, even though such "closer to
hardware" objects are probably popular candidates for wrap-around behavior.

The most important problem that I have with the discussed proposals is still
elsewhere: they go against the MyHDL-specific philosophy that I described
earlier.  The starting point of the proposals is that wrap-around behavior will
only supported on "full range" bit-vectors. This is likely influenced by
implicit assumptions of efficient hardware implementation.

In my modeling work, I use wrap-around counters all the time. However, more
often than not, their bounds are not powers of 2. I suspect this is the same
for many designers. As I have argued earlier, we should look at modeling first,
and at hardware efficiency later. In previous cases, such as the `intbv` type,
we have been able to achieve much easier modeling without having to pay a price
in efficiency.

Ada modular types
=================

Recently I got introduced to Ada modular types. These are
natural integer types with wrap-around behaviour.

The wrap-around behavior of modular types is based on the sound mathematical
concept of 
[modulo arithmetic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modular_arithmetic).  Therefore, the
modulus is not limited to powers of 2.

The rationale behind modular types is interesting. For
example:

"The modulus of a modular type need not be a power of two although it often
will be. It might, however, be convenient to use some obscure prime number as
the modulus perhaps in the implementation of hash tables."
[\[Ref\]](http://www.adaic.org/resources/add_content/standards/95rat/rat95html/rat95-p2-3.html)

Another reference says:

"Modular types don't need to be powers of two, but if they are the Ada
compiler will select especially efficient  operations to implement them."
[\[Ref\]](http://www.dwheeler.com/lovelace/s17sf.htm)

This is exactly the kind of reasoning I'm looking for. Ada considers module
arithmetic important enough to warrant direct language support, but in the
general, mathematically sound sense. On the other hand, it recognizes that
powers of 2 bounds are very important. There is actually a predefined package
with power of 2 based subtypes. Moreover, the compiler can select "especially
efficient operations" to implement them.

Interestingly, Ada even defines and/or/xor bit operations on modular types,
unlike other integer types. Apparently it chooses modular types for this
purpose because their "unsigned" interpretation poses less problems than bit
operations on "signed" representations. In any case, the dual nature of the
type - both high-level and representation-friendly - is similar to what MyHDL
does with the `intbv`. When reading all this, I can only conclude that VHDL
lost a big opportunity by forgetting about its origins.

I believe the Ada example is the route to follow. Two issues still have to be
addressed:

  * Ada modular types are restricted to natural values. 
We want to support integer values in general.
  * Ada modular types are types, which means that conversions would be needed
to let them work with other integer-like types. 
(Disclaimer: I am not sure that this statement is true.)

A proposal for MyHDL: the modbv type
====================================

Ada's modular type is called `mod`. By analogy, I am proposing a `modbv` type
in MyHDL. Behaviorally, the only difference with `intbv` would be how bounds
are handled: out-of-bound values result in an error with `intbv`, and in
wrap-around with `modbv`. In particular, `modbv` would have exactly the same
interface as the intbv. The wap-around behavior would be defined as follows,
with `val` denoting the current value and `min`/`max` the bounds:

```python
val = (val - min) % (max - min) + min
```

Unlike Ada, `intbv` and `modbv` would be subtypes of a general
integer-bitvector type. Therefore, they can be mixed transparantly in
expressions. This should be not problem as the bound handling only occurs at
assignment time in the assigned object.
           
This proposal addresses the issues mentioned earlier. In particular:

```python
count += 1
```
and

```python
count = modbv(0)[32:]
```
would have wrap-around behavior.

Implementation notes
====================

Technically, the cleanest implementation would probably be to make both `intbv`
and `modbv` a subtype of some general integer-bitvector class. In a first
phase, it would probably be OK to simply subclass intbv.

To make this kind of subclassing possible, the intbv class has to be made more
robust. For example, at some points were it returns a literal `intbv` object,
it should use the actual subtype itself.

The basic difference with `intbv` is bound handling. Currently, this is already
done in a separate method called `intbv._checkBounds()`. This method should
probably be renamed to `intbv._handleBounds()`, and then overwritten with the
proper behavior in the subclass.

Conversion notes
================

It is expected that conversion would work directly for the case of "full range"
`modbv` objects. (Note that it is not sufficient that both bounds are powers of
2.) In a first phase, the convertor could impose that restriction.

To demonstrate the advantage of the chosen approach, we could attempt to lift
some restrictions for interesting use cases. For example, a common use case for
wrap-around behavior would be incrementors and decrementors. The analyzer could
detect such cases and mark them. For such patterns, we could then support
general wrap-around for non full-range objects also. For example:

```python
count.next = count + 1
```
would be converted to the Verilog/VHDL equivalent of:

```python
if count == MAX-1:
    count.next = MIN
else:
    count.next = count + 1
```

It is probably possible to remove more restrictions in a gradual process. When
doing so, we would be adding items to the list of useful features that MyHDL
can fully support, even though they have no native support in Verilog/VHDL. At
some point, this list of features, unique to MyHDL, could become very
attractive to Verilog/VHDL designers.

Status
======

A draft implementation has been developed in the 0.8-dev branch in the
mercurial repo.

Acknowledgements
================

Chris Felton has kept this feature on the map.  Thanks to Chris Felton, Tom
Dillon and Benoît Allard for proposals, tests, and discussions
