---
mep: 001
title: MEP Purpose and Guidelines
layout: mep 
author: Jan Decaluwe, Günter Dannoritzer
status: Active
date: 2011-05-18
---

What is a MEP?
==============

MEP stands for MyHDL Enhancement Proposal. A MEP is a design document providing
information to the MyHDL community, or describing a new feature for MyHDL. The
MEP should provide a concise technical specification of the feature and a
rationale for the feature.

The MEP concept is heavily inspired by the
[PEP](http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0001), the Python Enhancement Proposal. 
In the Python world, the PEP works very well, and a MEP is basically a
simplified version for our purposes.

We intend MEPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing new features, for
collecting community input on an issue, and for documenting the design
decisions that have gone into MyHDL. The MEP author is responsible for building
consensus within the community and documenting dissenting opinions.

MEP development
===============

MEPs are maintained on the MyHDL development website, which is developed in 
the [site_myhdl_dev_repo]. This is a public repository that documents
the history of a MEP.

The main responsibility of a MEP lies with its author. Before starting a new
MEP, its idea should be discussed on the MyHDL mailing list.

Policy
======

In the development phase, the MEP is assigned the *Draft* status. When fully
developed and provided with a functional implementation, the MEP can get the
status *Final*, documenting that the content of the MEP is ready to be
implemented into MyHDL.

A MEP can also become *Rejected* if it turned out to be not a good idea.

The right to change the status of a MEP from *Draft* belongs exclusively to Jan
Decaluwe.

Once the MEP has the status *Final* and it is implemented in the source
code, the MyHDL version will be added to the MEP document. From this time on,
the text of the document will be frozen. A *Final* MEP should not be changed,
except for spelling mistakes or language corrections from a neutral
proofreader. It is intended to document the MyHDL development history for
experts. 

In case the functionality described in a MEP needs to be altered or extended, a
new MEP shall be created, describing the new desired implementation. The new
MEP will live through the same steps as the MEP process describes. The new MEP
should cross reference the MEP its implementation is based on.

In case the new MEP will replace an implementation of an existing MEP, the old
MEP will get the status *Replaced* as soon as the new MEP achieves the status
*Final*. Both MEPs should cross reference each other.

Informational MEPs may also get the status *Active* if they are not meant
to be completed. This MEP is an example. 

