---
mep:     109
title:   Automatic inference of the reset behavior 
layout:  mep
author:  Jan Decaluwe 
status:  Final 
date:    2012-02-10
version: 0.8
---

Introduction
============

In classical synthesizable RTL coding, the reset behavior is described
explicitly. This has a number of significant disadvantages. This document
contains a proposal to resolve those disadvantages by inferring the reset
structure automatically.

Example of the issues
=====================

The issues with classical reset behavior coding are best explained with an
example.

Consider the following example of an uart transmitter, coded
in synthesizable MyHDL.

```python
def uart_tx(tx_bit, tx_valid, tx_byte, tx_clk, tx_rst):
    
    index = Signal(intbv(0, min=0, max=8))
    st = enum('IDLE', 'START', 'DATA')
    state = Signal(st.IDLE)
    
    @always(tx_clk.posedge, tx_rst.negedge)
    def fsm():
        if tx_rst == 0:
            tx_bit.next = 1
            index.next = 0
            state.next = st.IDLE
        else:
            if state == st.IDLE:
                tx_bit.next = 1
                if tx_valid: # a pulse
                    state.next = st.START
            elif state == st.START:
                tx_bit.next = 0
                index.next = 7
                state.next = st.DATA
            elif state == st.DATA:
                tx_bit.next = tx_byte[index]
                if index == 0:
                    state.next = st.IDLE
                else:
                    index.next = index - 1
                    
    return fsm
```

Let us examine the characteristics of the code dedicated to the reset behavior
code.

The reset behavior is described using a the top-level `if-else` structure with
a number of assignments under the `if`. A significant piece of code at a
prominent location is therefore dedicated to "non-functional" behavior.

Reset behavior coding is error-prone. For a proper gate-level implementation,
most if not all registers should typically be reset. However, it is easy to
forget some reset assignments. Such bugs are not necessarily easily detected
during RTL or gate-level simulations.

In the example, the edge that asserts reset is in the sensitivity list. It is
easy to forget this, and in that case the reset will not behave asynchronously
as intended but synchronously. Note also that it is somewhat strange to specify
an sensitivity to an edge when describing asynchronous behavior.

In MyHDL signals are declared using a value. This value serves both as the type
specification for the underlying value of the signal, and as the initial value.
This initial value is similar in nature to the reset value: it specifies the
signal value at simulation start-up. Note that in the reset assignments, the
signals are reset to the same value of their initial value. In particular, it
is hard to imagine a useful case where the initial value and the reset value
would be different.

The uart in the example would be used in higher level code as follows:

```python
tx_bit = Signal(bool(1))
tx_valid = Signal(bool(0))
tx_byte = Signal(intbv(0)[8:])
tx_clk = Signal(bool(0))
tx_rst = Signal(bool(1))
   
uart_tx_inst = uart_tx(tx_bit, tx_valid, tx_byte, tx_clk, tx_rst)
```

Note again that the initial value of `tx_bit` is the same as its reset value,
`'1`', as required by typical uart systems.

In summary: the code to describe the reset behavior is significant and
error-prone, and the separate specification of initial values and reset values
seems redundant.

Proposed solution
=================

To solve the disadvantages described in the previous section, a technique is
proposed to infer the reset behavior automatically.

The main idea is to use the initial values of signals as the specification of
reset values.  The solution is implemented with two new MyHDL constructs. The
first one is a new decorator called `@always_seq`. Using this decorator, code
with identical behavior as in the previous section can be described as follows:

```python
def uart_tx_2(tx_bit, tx_valid, tx_byte, tx_clk, tx_rst):
    
    index = Signal(intbv(0, min=0, max=8))
    st = enum('IDLE', 'START', 'DATA')
    state = Signal(st.IDLE)
    
    @always_seq(tx_clk.posedge, reset=tx_rst)
    def fsm():
        if state == st.IDLE:
            tx_bit.next = 1
            if tx_valid: # a pulse
                state.next = st.START
        elif state == st.START:
            tx_bit.next = 0
            index.next = 7
            state.next = st.DATA
        elif state == st.DATA:
            tx_bit.next = tx_byte[index]
            if index == 0:
                state.next = st.IDLE
            else:
                index.next = index - 1
                    
    return fsm
```

The `@always_seq` decorator takes two arguments: a clock edge and a reset
signal. It inspects the code to find the registers, and uses the initial values
to construct the reset behavior.

The second construct is a specialized signal subclass called `ResetSignal`. It
is used as follows:

```python
tx_bit = Signal(bool(1))
tx_valid = Signal(bool(0))
tx_byte = Signal(intbv(0)[8:])
tx_clk = Signal(bool(0))
tx_rst = ResetSignal(1, active=0, async=True)

uart_tx_inst = uart_tx_2(tx_bit, tx_valid, tx_byte, tx_clk, tx_rst)
```

The `ResetSignal` constructor has three arguments: the initial value as normal,
an `active` argument with the active level, and a `async` argument that
specifies whether the reset style is asynchronous or synchronous.

Solution discussion
===================

The proposed solution has some very desirable features.

Explicit reset behavior coding is no longer necessary. Code reviewers are thus
no longer distracted by "non-functional" code. It is sufficient to check the
initial values to verify whether the reset value is correctly specified.
Moreover, one indentation level is saved for functional coding.

Even more importantly, the reset structure is correct by construction. All registers are automatically included in the reset behavior, and the sensitivity list is automatically correct according to the reset style.

Traditionally, the reset behavior is spread out over all sequential processes.
Therefore, it has to be debugged by investigating all those processes. Even
worse, if a change in style or active level is required, all processes are
affected. In contrast, with the proposed technique all reset features are
specified at single location in the `ResetSignal` constructor. Changes are
trivial. For example, to change to an active high synchronous reset one merely
has to change the constructor as follows:

```python
tx_rst = ResetSignal(1, active=1, async=False)
```

Occasionally, it is useful to have registers without reset at all. The proposed
technique is also useful in that case. In particular, the `@always_seq`
decorator accepts `None` as the reset argument:

```python
@always_seq(tx_clk.posedge, reset=None)
```

A reviewer will have no doubt what the intention is. In contrast, in the case
of a traditional always block, the reviewer may think that the designer has
delayed the detailed reset coding for later and then forgotten about it.

Conversion to Verilog and VHDL
==============================

As modeling the reset behavior is a typical task in synthesizable RTL coding,
the proposed technique is fully convertible to Verilog and VHDL.

Limitations
===========

All registers in a process are reset
------------------------------------

All registers in a process are automatically included in the reset behavior. If
it is the intention that some registers should not be reset, those registers
and the corresponding code should be factored out in a separate process.

Actually, this is not really a limitation but a feature. If some registers in a
process are reset and others not, a synthesis tool may generate undesirable
feedback loops that are active during the reset condition. This is not good
practice and probably not the intention.

Register inferencing from variables is not supported
----------------------------------------------------

An important limitation is that the proposed technique is limited to registers
inferred from signals. Registers inferred from variables are not supported,
because such state variables cannot be described in classic functions (in
particular the functions required by MyHDL decorators such as `@always_seq` and
`@always`).

In fact, the reason is a Python2 limitation. Currently, to infer registers from
variables, one has to use the `@instance` decorator and declare the state
variables outside an infinite `while True` loop.

In Python3, this limitation can be lifted with the introduction of the
`nonlocal` declaration. This will make it possible for functions to modify
variables in the enclosing scope. It should be possible to adapt the
`@always_seq` and `@always` decorators to support such variables.

Design remarks
==============

Those who like the proposed solution will probably come up with the following
question: why is something like this is not available in Verilog and VHDL?

The reason is the concept behind initial values. In Verilog, all signals in
synthesizable code are initialized to an "unknown" value `'X`' by default. VHDL
has a mixed approach. For lower level types, the initial value is the "unknown"
value `'U`'. For higher level types, such as integers and enums, it is the
"leftmost" value in the type specification. In this case, it is typically the
same as the reset value.

MyHDL takes the radical approach to avoid "unkown" values altogether. All
variables and signals are constructed using a defined initial value.  The
rationale behind this design decision is beyond the scope of this document.
However, regardless of its merit, it can be used to our advantage in this case
by making the proposed technique possible. Conversely, it is unlikely that
something similar will be available for Verilog or VHDL anytime soon.

Note that the proposed technique nullifies an argument often heard in favor of
unknown initial values: the detection of registers that are not reset, by
simulation techniques. It basically turns the concept on its head by using
initial values as reset values and avoiding such registers in the first place.

The name `@always_seq` was chosen in analogy with `@always_comb`. Like
`@always_comb` for combinatorial logic, it infers some relevant behavior
automatically for sequential logic, avoiding error-prone explicit coding.


