---
mep:     108
title:   Conversion of Top-Level Methods
layout:  mep
author:  Christopher Felton
status:  Final 
date:    2012-02-10
version: 0.8
---

Introduction
============
This MEP is intended to add support for top-level methods in 
conversion.  Using classes/objects to organize digital hardware 
can be a natural and a useful development approach for complex 
and modular IP.  

In the latest release version, 0.7, top-level methods are not 
convertible because the object reference (`self`) is treated 
as a port.  For top-level methods to be convertible the object
reference (`self`) needs to be ignored.

Example (existing function conversion)
======================================
MyHDL converts MyHDL functions, which represent a hardware 
module, to Verilog and VHDL.  For a function to be convertible
it needs [ports](http://docs.myhdl.org/en/latest/manual/intro.html#signals-ports-and-concurrency) 
and to return a 
[MyHDL generator(s)](http://docs.myhdl.org/en/latest/manual/background.html#a-small-tutorial-on-generators).
The converter code identifies the arguments of Signal type 
and adds them to the port list.  

The following is an example of a converitble function.

```python
def adder(x, y, z):
    @always_comb
    def logic():
       z.next = x + y
    return logic
```

```python
>>> toVerilog(adder, x, y, z)
>>> toVHDL(adder, x, y, z)
```

Proposed Enhancement
====================
As mentioned the enhancement proposed is to add top-level method 
conversion support.  The 
method to be converted has the same requirements as a function:
it needs a ports and returns a generator(s).

Using the brief examples above a top-level convertible method might 
look like the following:

```python
class Adder():
   def __init__(self):
      pass
   def m_adder(self, x, y, z):
      @always_comb
      def logic():
         z.next = x + y
      return logic
```
       
The above example isn't a good example why a class would be used
to create, what is often consider a piece of IP, but it is 
sufficient as an example for method conversion.

To convert the method in the *Adder* object the convertible 
method is passed to the conversion functions.

```python
>>> MyAddr = Adder()
>>> toVerilog(MyAddr.m_adder, x, y, z)
>>> toVHDL(MyAddr.m_adder, x, y, z)
```
   
In the above example and with the existing (0.7) conversion code the
`self` argument in the "m_adder" method will be converted to a 
port in the lower-level Verilog/VHDL.

Implementation Comments
=======================

Top Function Visitor
--------------------

The use of the `self` argument, is only an issue for the 
top-level method parsing.  This is because the parser flattens 
the design and the ports are not analyzed for functions and methods
lower in the hierarchy.  

A top-level function or method is passed 
to the converter code and in the
[analyze module](https://bitbucket.org/jandecaluwe/myhdl/src/tip/myhdl/conversion/_analyze.py) 
the 
[visit_FunctionDev](https://bitbucket.org/jandecaluwe/myhdl/src/tip/myhdl/conversion/_analyze.py?at=default#cl-1290) 
visitor determines the top-level ports.

```python
_AnalyzeTopFuncVisitor.visit_FunctionDev(...)
```

In the above node visitor a method is identified and the first 
argument is skipped.

Extract Hierarchy
-----------------

The 
[extract hierarchy](https://bitbucket.org/jandecaluwe/myhdl/diff/myhdl/_extractHierarchy.py?diff2=d61bf91023b7&at=0.8-dev) 
is modified to identify the methods
that describe hardware and determine if conversion 
function/method attributes are present.  The extractor 
checks for an argument named `self` and retrieves the function
from `self`.  If a function is bound to `self` the extractor 
will use it in the extract hierarchy.

