---
mep:     115
title:   How to import the myhdl library
layout:  mep
author:  Jan Decaluwe
status:  Draft
date:    2016-03-05
version: 1.0
---

Background
==========

Traditionally, the `myhdl` library is often imported using a wildcard import, as
follows

```
from myhdl import *
```

The obvious convenience is that all objects in the library are readily
available. For example:

```
from myhdl import *

@module
def mod(...)

    s = Signal(intbv(0)[8:])

    @always_comb
    def comb():
        i = intbv(0)[4:0]
        ...

    @instance
    def inst():
        ...

    return comb, inst, ...

sim = Simulation(...)
sim.run()
```

The rationale behind wildcard import is that MyHDL is like a mini-language in
itself that exports many objects. At some point, wildcard imports were
considered acceptable in such a case according to some sources, for example for
the `Tkinter` library.

However, the [current Python guidelines][pep8] clearly state that wildcard
import should be avoided in production code, except for some very specific
applications. From the MyHDL perspective, the disadvantages are the following:

1. As the Python guidelines state, wildcard import makes it unclear which names
are present in the namespace, confusing both readers and many automated tools.
2. There is a chance that Python builtins or standard library objects are
implicitly shadowed, increasing the potential confusion. Over the years, this
has happened twice already with MyHDL, with the `bin()` function and the `enum`
module.   
3. Some names may have a different meaning in the Python context, adding to the
confusion when used unqualified. Examples in MyHDL are `module` and `instance`.

Furthermore, the argument of MyHDL as a mini-language is somewhat misleading. It
is explicitly intended and encouraged that MyHDL can be used in conjunction with
other Python libraries. That is also what users are doing. In such scenarios, it
becomes increasingly likely that wildcard import causes problems.

The conclusion is that there should be a good way to import MyHDL objects
without relying on wildcard import. The goal of this MEP is to investigate the
issues and to define a recommended approach to import the `myhdl` library.

[pep8]: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#imports

Explicit import
===============

An obvious way to accommodate some of the issues is by relying on explicit
import of the required names. For example:

```
from myhdl import module, Signal, intbv, always_comb, instance, Simulation
```

This solves the issue of the potential ambiguity of names. However, it has
several disadvantages:

* the import line can become quite lengthy
* any required object name has to be added explicitly to the import line
* a reviewer still sees unqualified names in the code, which may be
confusing

Module import
=============

A straightforward approach is to import the module as is:

```
import myhdl
```

This addresses all the issues but has one important disadvantage: some
code may look heavy. For example:

```
import myhdl
...

s = myhdl.Signal(myhdl.intbv(0)[8:])
```

As `Signal` and `intbv` are intensely used types in behavioral descriptions,
this is an inconvenient distraction to code writers and reviewers.

A dual approach
===============

To find good solution, we take the standpoint of a code reviewer and recognize
that not all objects  serve the same purpose. Some objects, like `Simulation`
and `toVerilog`, are only used sparingly. Other objects are used as decorators
on functions. They serve as anchor points in the code and it is important to
define their meaning very clearly. For those kind of objects, qualified names
are appropriate.

On the other hand, types such as `Signal` and `intbv` are used to describe the
detailed actual behavior. In that case, it can be more convenient to use
unqualified names.

The conclusion is that a dual approach is appropriate, where some objects
are referred to in a qualified, and others in a unqualified way.

Proposal for a recommended import strategy
==========================================

The dual import approach consists of two import lines: the first line for
the module itself, the second for a limited set of unqualified names.

The module import can be made more make more lightweight without
jeopardizing clarity by importing it as the shorthand `hdl`, as follows:

```
import myhdl as hdl
```

This import reads nicely as "import MyHDL as the HDL". Qualified
objects also read nicely, for example as "HDL module" and "HDL simulation".

The second import would consist a limited set of unqualified type names from
the library, such as `Signal` and `intbv`.

The example presented earlier becomes:

```
import myhdl as hdl
from myhdl import Signal, intbv

@hdl.module
def mod(...)

    s = Signal(intbv(0)[8:])

    @hdl.always_comb
    def comb():
        i = intbv(0)[4:0]
        ...

    @hdl.instance
    def inst():
        ...

    return comb, inst, ...

sim = hdl.Simulation(...)
sim.run()
```

The recommendation would be that only objects that are used within behavioral
descriptions (i.e. within generator code) can be imported in an unqualified way.
In that case, the proposed approach can be used without additional implementation
work.

In case of ambiguity in a particular piece of code, the module shorthand is
always available as a fallback solution. However, if qualified references are
also required within behavioral descriptions, additional implementation work is
needed.

Alternatives
============

An alternative for the shorthand name `hdl` could be the even shorter name `hw`,
that stands for "hardware". Qualified objects would also read nicely as
"hardware module" or "hardware simulation".

Another possibility is to define the shorthand name as another namespace object
in the library itself. This would enable single line imports as follows:

```
from myhdl import hdl, Signal, intbv
```

This would also be more direct way of enforcing the recommended shorthand name.
On the other hand, this approach may be "too clever", and more confusing than
the more explicit dual import strategy. Moreover, it would require additional
implementation work.

Decision
========



[mep-114]: https://github.com/jandecaluwe/myhdl/tree/mep-114
