---
mep:     114
title:   The block decorator
layout:  mep
author:  Jan Decaluwe
status:  Draft
date:    2016-02-12
version: 1.0
---

Background
==========

The design approach behind MyHDL is minimalistic: existing Python features are
reused as much as possible, and new features are only introduced when deemed
strictly necessary. However, the design decisions are not always
straightforward, especially because some degree of metaprogramming and
introspection is unavoidable in this project.

For example, early on it was considered mandatory to have support for the
automatic inference of combinatorial behavior. As a result, a function
`always_comb()` was introduced that converts a function into a generator that is
sensitive to its input signals.

Sometimes, new Python concepts greatly facilitate the implementation of certain
features. For MyHDL, the most significant example is the introduction of
decorators in Python 2.4, as a structured approach for metaprogramming. For
example, it was immediately clear that the usage pattern of the `always_comb()`
function matched the decorator pattern exactly. It was therefore a no-brainer to
use `always_comb` as a decorator instead. Subsequently, it made sense to
introduce a number of  additional decorators.

The feature of concern in this MEP is hierarchy extraction. Here, the historical
design decision was to try to make it transparent to the user. In particular,
instead of introducing specific data structures to facilitate the task, the
Python profiler was reused in the background for the purpose. Over time, it has
become clear that the approach suffers from a number of significant
disadvantages. In this MEP, the problems are discussed and a solution is
proposed.

The problem with hierarchy extraction
=====================================

Using the Python profiler for hierarchy extraction originally seemed like an
elegant hack. As MyHDL uses functions to describe hardware building blocks, and
as the profiler tracks function calls, the match seemed obvious. However, the
approach has several disadvantages:

* **Non-intuitive API**
As the hardware data structure must be built under profiler control, the API
functions involved need the elements to build it instead of the data structure
itself. For example, instead of: `toVerilog(top(*args, **kwargs))` you have to
use `toVerilog(top, *args, **kwargs)`.

* **Cumbersome error checking**
A meaningful hardware hierarchy implies certain restrictions on the data
structure. However, when using the profiler, data structure building and
extraction occur at the same time. In practice, this makes it hard to detect
certain data structure issues, resulting in cumbersome errors.

* **Normal profiler tasks disabled**
As the profiler is reused for hierarchy extraction, it cannot be used for its
normal purposes, such as debugging, during this process. Understandably, this is
unexpected and surprising.

* **Hard-to-maintain code**
Last but not least, the hierarchy extraction code has proven to be complex and
hard to maintain. It is a part of MyHDL that hampers progress.

As a result, hierarchy extraction is the part where MyHDL feels most "brittle",
as reported by users. Therefore, there is a need for a more explicit solution
that overcomes these issues and improves robustness.

The `block` decorator
======================

Python decorators have proven their value as a solution for metaprogramming, in
general and in MyHDL in particular. The proposal is therefore to introduce a new
`block` decorator, to decorate functions that describe hardware blocks.

Like before, a hardware description function should return instantiations of
subblocks and/or local generators. However, the `block` decorator can check the
return values, and encapsulate them in a dedicated object.

The advantages of this approach are as follows:

* Issues will be flagged upfront, so that the resulting hardware data structure
will be well-formed.

* Hardware extraction becomes a separate, subsequent task that is guaranteed to
succeed. It can be done using a classical data structure traversal, so that
the profiler is no longer necessary. It is clear that the hierarchy extraction
code will be simplified significantly.

* The API can be simplified by directly passing the hardware data
structure to the functions involved.

* Functions intended for hardware description will clearly stand out, resulting
in clearer code.

Implementation
==============

Under the hood, the functionality is implemented using two classes: `_Block` and
`_BlockInstance`. The `block` decorator creates a `_Block` object with the
decorated function as its parameter. It has a call interface that creates
`_BlockInstance` objects.

A `_BlockInstance` object calls the original function with the actual
parameters upon construction. That call returns the subinstances of the object,
which can then be verified. A `_BlockInstance` object also maintains the
namespaces for signals and lists of signals.

Backwards compatibility issues
==============================

The proposed solution has a significant disadvantage: it introduces some
backwards incompatible changes and a new method-based API for simulation and
conversion.

Let us first make clear what does *not* change: _For simulation, old code will
continue to work as before._ All the simulator needs is a structure of
communicating generators, regardless of how it is built. That having said, the
new method-based API also contains simulation methods. Although the
`Simulation()` class will still be available, it is probably easier to use the
method-based API in most cases.

The `block` decorator will become mandatory when hardware extraction is
required, more specifically for waveform tracing and conversion. The required
user code change is minimal:

```
       old code               ->            new code
------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        @block
def myblock(<ports>):                   def myblock(<ports>):
    ...                       ->            ...
    return <instances>                      return <instances>
```

However, the `block` decorator will be "viral": when used on a function, it
must be used on the functions that describe subblocks too, or else an error
will occur.

New API
=======

The `block` decorator enables a new, method-based API which is more consistent,
simplifies implementation, and reduces the size of the `myhdl` namespace.

This work is inspired by the related work on
[uhdl](https://github.com/jck/uhdl).

The methods work on block instances, created by calling a function decorated
with the `block` decorator:

```
@block
def myblock(<ports>):
...
return <instances>

inst = myblock(<port-associations>)
# inst supports the methods of the new API
```

The API looks as follows:

#### **`inst.run_sim(duration=None)`**
Run a simulation "forever" (default) or for a specified duration.   

#### **`inst.config_sim(backend='myhdl', trace=False)`**
Optional simulation configuration.

* `backend`: Defaults to 'myhdl'.
* `trace`: Enable waveform tracing, default False.  

#### **`inst.quit_sim()`**
Quit an active simulation. This is method is currently required because
only a single simulation can be active.

#### **`inst.convert(hdl='Verilog', **kwargs)`**  
Converts MyHDL code to a target HDL.

* `hdl`: 'VHDL' or 'Verilog'. Defaults to Verilog.

Supported keyword arguments:

* `path`: Destination folder. Defaults to current working dir.   
* `name`: Module and output file name. Defaults to `self.mod.__name__`.      
* `trace`: Whether the testbench should dump all signal waveforms. Defaults to
False.   
* `testbench`: Verilog only. Specifies whether a testbench should be created.
Defaults to True.   
* `timescale`: timescale parameter. Defaults to '1ns/10ps'. Verilog only.   

#### **`inst.verify_convert()`**
Verify conversion output, by comparing target HDL simulation log with MyHDL
simulation log.   

#### **`inst.analyze_convert()`**
Analyze conversion output by compilation with target HDL compiler.   


Instance naming
===============

A visible change in the output will be the naming of instances. Previously,
their names were based on local variable names in the instantiating function.
However, because instantiation no longer occurs under fine-grained profiler
control, those local variables names can no longer be used.

Instead, the basename of an instance will be synthesized automatically from the
name of the corresponding function and an instantiation counter as follows:

```
instance_name = '{function_name}_{instance_count}'
```

An advantage of this approach is that it is no longer necessary to give
instances a local name: anonymous instantiation will work too. A disadvantage is
of course that the local variable name, which may be clearer and shorter than
the synthesized name, is not present in the output. To accommodate this
disadvantage, explicit naming control is possible as follows:

```
inst = myblock(<signals>)
inst.name = "myinst"
```

Note that explicit naming is always optional: it is purely a convenience
to have clearer output.

Also note that in the previous discussion "name" refers to the basename of the
instance. The eventual name in the conversion output will contain a hierarchical
prefix.

Introduction path
=================

The changes are significant but are expected to result in important benefits,
including facilitating new development considerably. The proposal is  therefore
to move carefully but swiftly. In particular, there should be one release that
supports both the old and the new API. When the old API is used, a deprecation
warning will be issued to encourage users to switch to the new API.

Why is it called *block*?
=========================

The name *block* was chosen because the original choice *module* is the name of
a first-class Python object with a completely different meaning. It was felt
that this would cause too much confusion and ambiguity.

Other names were considered by the community. A name referring to hardware was
rejected because it was felt that this would be too restrictive with regard to
MyHDL's capabilities. There was a clear preference for a more generic name
without a strongly different meaning in other HDLs, like *unit* or *block*.
Eventually *block* was chosen because it is sometimes already used as a synonym
to (hardware) *module*, like in *subblocks* or *top block*. Also, the commonly
used term *block diagram* basically refers to the same concept.

For consistency, an attempt will be made to prefer using *block* instead of
*module* in MyHDL terminology, in particular in the documentation.

Status
======

The functionality described in this MEP is under development in a feature branch
[mep-114]. Interested users are encouraged to review, test and provide feedback.

[mep-114]: https://github.com/jandecaluwe/myhdl/tree/mep-114
